Logging notes

Best practices for logging in modern applications (Java/Spring and general purpose):

1. Choose the Right Logging Framework
Use a robust, industry-standard logging framework (e.g., SLF4J + Logback, Log4j2, java.util.logging).
In Spring Boot, Logback is default and SLF4J is the facade.
2. Log Levels
Use appropriate log levels:
ERROR: For serious problems (e.g., exceptions, failures).
WARN: For unexpected situations that aren’t fatal.
INFO: For general application events (startup, shutdown, business events).
DEBUG: For debugging information, helpful during development.
TRACE: For very detailed logging (rarely used).
3. Sensitive Data
Never log sensitive information (e.g., passwords, secrets, credit card numbers, PII).
Mask or omit such data before logging.
4. Contextual Information
Include contextual info (user ID, request ID, session ID, etc.) to correlate logs.
Use MDC (Mapped Diagnostic Context) for adding context in multi-threaded apps.
5. Structured Logging
Prefer structured logs (JSON format) for better parsing and analysis (especially with ELK/EFK stacks).
Spring Boot supports JSON log output via Logback extensions.
6. Consistent Format
Use a consistent log format (timestamp, level, thread, logger, message).
Example: [2025-09-23 13:37:20] INFO  [thread-1] com.example.Service - Started successfully
7. Exception Logging
Always log the stack trace for exceptions:
Java
logger.error("Failed to process request", ex);
Don’t swallow exceptions silently.
8. Performance
Avoid expensive operations in log statements.
Use parameterized logging:
Java
logger.debug("Processing user: {}", userId);
Don’t log in tight loops unless necessary.
9. External System Integration
Integrate with centralized logging solutions (ELK, EFK, Splunk, CloudWatch, etc.).
Add correlation IDs for tracing across services/microservices.
10. Configuration and Rotation
Configure log levels, output paths, and rotation policies.
Ensure logs don’t fill the disk: use rotation and archival.
11. Regulatory Compliance
Ensure logging complies with legal requirements (GDPR, HIPAA, etc.).
Set retention policies and secure access to log files.
12. Testing and Review
Check logs during development and testing for usefulness and clarity.
Regularly review and prune noisy or redundant log statements.
